API keys (#85)
meilisearch/specifications: text/0085-api-keys.md

### V. `API Key` Explanations

#### Summary Key Points

- `/keys` management is restricted to the master key.
- When a master key is set at MeiliSearch first-launch, we generate two pre-configured `API Key` resources. A `Default Search API Key` restricted to the search action and a `Default Admin API Key` to handle all operations (except managing API Keys) on MeiliSearch.
- New endpoints are added to manage the `API Key` resource.
- `API keys` can have restrictions on which methods can be accessed via an `actions` list; they can also `expiresAt` a specific date time and be restricted to a specific set of `indexes`.

#### Managing `API Key`

![](https://i.imgur.com/mAUFnNb.png)

`Anna` manages the MeiliSearch instance; she uses the master key she defined at startup to generate an `API Key` resource for `Mark` to use in his client code to communicate with the MeiliSearch instance.

`Anna` can define access rights to certain indexes to define an expiration date and also authorized `actions` for an `API Key` (See API Key Actions List Definition Part).

Only the master key allows managing the API keys.

#### Master Key

> The master key exists to secure a MeiliSearch instance. As soon as a master key is set via the  `MEILI_MASTER_KEY` environment variable or the `--master-key` CLI option , the endpoint `/keys` is accessible only for the master key holder. It can be seen as a super admin key; It must be shared only with people who have to manage the security of a MeiliSearch instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The master key exists to secure a MeiliSearch instance. As soon as a master key is set via the  `MEILI_MASTER_KEY` environment variable or the `--master-key` CLI option , most of the routes become protected. Using the master key you are able to access the `/keys` endpoint to fetch the authorization keys.

The master key can be seen as a super admin key; It must be shared only with people who have to manage the security of a MeiliSearch instance.
```

This master key is not an API Key, thus is not stored and fetchable from an API endpoint. It must be seen as a runtime lock that activates the security of MeiliSearch as soon as an instance is launched with it.

At the first launch of MeiliSearch with a master key, MeiliSearch automatically generate two default API keys (See the `GET - /keys` example) to cover many of the most basic needs. It generates a `Default Search API Key` dedicated to the search that can be used on the client-side and a `Default Admin API Key` to manipulate a MeiliSearch instance from a backend side.

> If the value of the master key changes, the previously generated `API Keys` do not change or expire. Thus, MeiliSearch does not re-generate the previous generated default API keys.

Reviewer: If we relaunch meilisearch with a new master key the private and public key remain the same?

Author: Yes, the `Default Search API Key` and the `Default Admin API Key` remain the same to add extra work by updating all clients using these keys.

Reviewer: Can you change them in any way?

Author: Yes, they are editable!

Reviewer: How can you edit them?

#### Managing `API Key`

![](https://i.imgur.com/mAUFnNb.png)

`Anna` manages the MeiliSearch instance; she uses the main key she defined at startup to generate an `API Key` resource for `Mark` to use in his client code to communicate with the MeiliSearch instance.

`Anna` can define access rights to certain indexes to define an expiration date and also authorized `actions` for an `API Key` (See API Key Actions List Definition Part).

Only the main key allows managing the API keys.

#### Main Key

The main key exists to secure a MeiliSearch instance. As soon as a main key is set via the  `MEILI_MAIN_KEY` environment variable or the `--main-key` CLI option , the endpoint `/keys` is accessible only for the main key holder. It can be seen as a super admin key; It must be shared only with people who have to manage the security of a MeiliSearch instance.

This main key is not an API Key, thus is not stored and fetchable from an API endpoint. It must be seen as a runtime lock that activates the security of MeiliSearch as soon as an instance is launched with it.

> At the first launch of MeiliSearch with a main key, MeiliSearch automatically generate two default API keys (See the `GET - /keys` example) to cover many of the most basic needs. It generates a `Default Search API Key` dedicated to the search that can be used on the client-side and a `Default Admin API Key` to manipulate a MeiliSearch instance from a backend side.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the first launch of MeiliSearch with a main key, MeiliSearch automatically generates two default API keys (See the `GET - /keys` example) to cover many of the most basic needs. It generates a `Default Search API Key` dedicated to the search that can be used on the client-side and a `Default Admin API Key` to manipulate a MeiliSearch instance from a backend side.
```

If the value of the main key changes, the previously generated `API Keys` do not change or expire. Thus, MeiliSearch does not re-generate the previous generated default API keys.

If the main key is removed at MeiliSearch launch, the previously generated API keys no longer secure the MeiliSearch instance.

> If MeiliSearch is launched with the `production` value for the `MEILI_ENV` environement variable or the `--env` CLI option, a main key is mandatory to force the user to secure his instance. If the main key is omitted in that particular case, MeiliSearch launch is aborted and display the `Error: In production mode, the environment variable MEILI_MAIN_KEY is mandatory` error in stdout.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If MeiliSearch is launched with the `production` value for the `MEILI_ENV` environment variable or the `--env` CLI option, the main key is mandatory to force the user to secure his instance. If a main key is omitted in that particular case, MeiliSearch launch is aborted and displays the `Error: In production mode, the environment variable MEILI_MAIN_KEY is mandatory` error in stdout.
```

> Note that the main key does not appear on the `/keys` endpoints.

---

#### `API Key` object representation

| field       | type    | description                                      |
|-------------|---------|--------------------------------------------------|
| key         | string  | The generated key. **Generated by MeiliSearch**. |
| actions     | array   | A list of actions permitted for the key. `["*"]` for all actions. See Actions list definition part. |
| indexes     | array   | A list of indexes permitted for the key. `["*"]` for all indexes. |
| expiresAt   | string  | Represent the expiration date and time as `ISO-8601` format. `null` equals to no expiration time. |
| description | string  | A description for the key. `null` if empty. |
| createdAt   | string  | Represent the date and time as `ISO-8601` format when the API key has been created. **Generated by MeiliSearch** |
| updatedAt   | string  | Represent the date and time as `ISO-8601` format when the API key has been updated. **Generated by MeiliSearch** |

> #### `POST`/`PUT` - `/keys` - API Key object payload definition

Reviewer 2: Put or patch then?

Author: `patch`, it was a miss on my side 🥲. The route described below uses the verb `patch`.

### III. Glossary

| Term               | Definition |
|--------------------|------------|
| Main Key         | This is the main key that allows you to create other API keys. The main key is defined by the user when launching MeiliSearch, thus gives access to the `/keys` API endpoint. |
| API Key            | API keys are stored and managed from the endpoint `/keys` by the main key holder. These are the keys used by the technical teams to interact with MeiliSearch at the level of the client code. |

### IV. Personas

| Persona | Role |
|---------|------|
| Anna    | Anna has an `ssh` access to the MeiliSearch instance and manages it on a daily basis. |
| Mark    | Mark is a developer from the same company as Anna. He will implement the code to communicate with MeiliSearch to solve technical/product needs. |

### V. `API Key` Explanations

#### Summary Key Points

- Occurrences of `master key` are changed by `main key`.
- `MEILI_MASTER_KEY` environment variable is renamed `MEILI_MAIN_KEY`.
- `--master-key` CLI option is renamed `--main-key`.
- `/keys` management is restricted to the main key.

> - When a main key is set at MeiliSearch first-launch, we generate two pre-configured `API Key` resources. A `Default Search API Key` restricted to the search action and a `Default Admin API Key` to handle all operations (except managing API Keys) on MeiliSearch.

Reviewer 3: What is the `expiresAt` value of the pre-configured keys? Are they any different from user-generated keys? Could a user change the `default search api key` to, say, include `document.add`?

Author: I will dedicate a part to its `Default API keys` generated by MeiliSearch.

These keys do not have an expiration date by default but can be modified at the convenience of the user. What is interesting is that Algolia for example in its system does not allow to modify this type of key.

They are mostly there to accelerate the implementation of the user's architecture like the public and private keys we had before.

In general, in a production environment, you must avoid having an API key with the search action that shares other actions because the search API key will most often be provided in the front-end code exposed to end-users and a malicious end-user could spoof it to perform unwanted operations on a MeiliSearch instance.

- New endpoints are added to manage the `API Key` resource.
- `API keys` can have restrictions on which methods can be accessed via an `actions` list; they can also `expiresAt` a specific date time and be restricted to a specific set of `indexes`.

> #### Managing `API Key`

Author: I moved the part about changing the `master` key to `main` key above.

The summary key points part is there to describe all the changes of the specification to have a wide spectrum at a glance.

![](https://i.imgur.com/mAUFnNb.png)

`Anna` manages the MeiliSearch instance; she uses the main key she defined at startup to generate an `API Key` resource for `Mark` to use in his client code to communicate with the MeiliSearch instance.

`Anna` can define access rights to certain indexes to define an expiration date and also authorized `actions` for an `API Key` (See API Key Actions List Definition Part).

Only the main key allows managing the API keys.

#### Main Key

> The main key exists to secure a MeiliSearch instance. As soon as a main key is set via the  `MEILI_MAIN_KEY` environment variable or the `--main-key` CLI option , the endpoint `/keys` is accessible only for the main key holder. It can be seen as a super admin key; It must be shared only with people who have to manage the security of a MeiliSearch instance.

Author: The `keys` endpoints will be inaccessible since the user will not be able to fill in a valid `main` key if he has not generated one at the MeiliSearch launch. I'll fill this in! Thank you for pointing this.

| indexes     | array   | A list of indexes permitted for the key. `["*"]` for all indexes. |
| expiresAt   | string  | Represent the expiration date and time as `ISO-8601` format. `null` equals to no expiration time. |
| createdAt   | string  | Represent the date and time as `ISO-8601` format when the API key has been created. **Generated by MeiliSearch** |
| updatedAt   | string  | Represent the date and time as `ISO-8601` format when the API key has been updated. **Generated by MeiliSearch** |

#### `POST`/ `PATCH` - `/keys` - API Key object payload definition

| field       | type    | required |description                     |
|-------------|---------|----------|--------------------------------|
| indexes     | array   | Required | `[*]` for all indexes. **Default**: `No Default` |
| description | string  | Optional | A description for the API key. **Default**: `null` |
| actions     | array   | Required | A list of actions permitted for the API key. `["*"]` for all actions. **See Actions list definition part**. `*` character can be used as a wildcard. e.g. `documents.*` to authorize access on all documents endpoints. **Default**: `No default` |

> | expiresAt   | string  | Required | The expiration date and time as `ISO-8601` format. `null` equals to no expiration time. Sending only the date part e.g `2021-12-01` leads to having an `expiresAt` value set to `2021-12-01T00:00:00`. **Default**: `No Default` |

Author: > Why make it mandatory and allow users to set it to `null` anyway?

Mostly for security concerns. By making it mandatory, it force the user to think of it and explicitly set that the API Key being generated will not have an expiration date by passing `null` instead of omitting the field.

> | expiresAt   | string  | Required | The expiration date and time as `ISO-8601` format. `null` equals to no expiration time. Sending only the date part e.g `2021-12-01` leads to having an `expiresAt` value set to `2021-12-01T00:00:00`. **Default**: `No Default` |

Author: > Also, are there any best/recommended practices regarding `expiresAt`? E.g.: avoid creating keys that never expire, avoid creating many keys with short expiry dates, etc

Very good question @guimachiavelli. 

In general, it is a good practice to always put expiration dates for security reasons. The fact of not putting any is in the eyes of the user who must understand the importance of his decision.

For a company, it also allows to have governance on the management of the keys and to make sure that the rotation of the keys is done at regular intervals. Regularly scheduled changes to an API secret ensure that their app is less vulnerable to being compromised.

---

#### Using `API Key` on client-code

![](https://i.imgur.com/kRKcB43.png)

`Mark 👨🏻` receives the `API Key` transmitted by `Anna 👩` on a secured channel of their choice. He uses it to authenticate requests from the client code to MeiliSearch.

#### **As `Mark 👨🏻`, I am using an expired/deleted API Key**

#### Request example

`POST` - `/indexes/movies/search`

#### Headers

```
    "X-MEILI-API-KEY": ":apiKey"
    "Content-Type: application/json"
```

#### Response

- 🔴 Accessing this route with an `API Key` that has expired or, been deleted returns an [invalid_api_key](0061-error-format-and-definitions.md#invalid_api_key) error.

---

### **As `Mark 👨🏻`, I am using a valid API Key, but the permission set is not sufficient to access the requested API resource**

#### Request example

`POST` - `/indexes/movies/search`

#### Headers

```
    "X-MEILI-API-KEY": ":apiKey"
    "Content-Type: application/json"
```

#### Response

- 🔴 Accessing this route with an `API Key` that don't have sufficient permissions to access it returns an [invalid_api_key](0061-error-format-and-definitions.md#invalid_api_key) error.

## 2. Technical Aspects

### Synchronous write of `API Key` resources

> Synchronous writing would make it possible to dissociate key management from the update store, which handles asynchronous writing.

Reviewer 3: I'm a bit confused: will the API Key endpoint be sync or async? The phrasing makes me interpret this as a suggestion, but I'm assuming I'm wrong?

Author: Indeed, it is not clear. Thanks, @guimachiavelli. I rephrased that part to make it clear that the operations on /keys are synchronous.

If MeiliSearch is launched with the `production` value for the `MEILI_ENV` environment variable or the `--env` CLI option, a master key is mandatory to force the user to secure his instance. If the master key is omitted in that particular case, MeiliSearch launch is aborted and displays the `Error: In production mode, the environment variable MEILI_MASTER_KEY is mandatory` error in stdout.

> 🚨 A user coming from a version prior to v0.25.0 and having a master-key will have to update his code to use the newly generated default keys replacing the public and private. Since the keys are generated uniquely and no longer cascade from the master key. See 1.5.3 Defaults API Key section.

> 🚨 The master-key should never be exposed to the public or bad-intentioned persons for security measures as it may compromise a MeiliSearch instance.

> Note that the master key does not appear on the `/keys` endpoints.

#### 1.5.3 Default API Keys

When the user accessing the machine launches MeiliSearch with a `master` key the first time, MeiliSearch will generate two API keys described below, as it did before with the `public` and `private` key.

> If the user changes the value of the `master` key later, these two default keys are not modified. However, these two API keys can be changed using the `/keys' endpoints.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the user changes the value of the `master` key later, these two default keys are not modified. However, these two API keys can be changed using the `/keys` endpoints.
```

- If the master-key changes, all `API Keys` are re-generated.
- These default API Keys can be modified/deleted with the `/keys` endpoint but are not re-created if MeiliSearch has already generated them at some point.
- New endpoints are added to manage the `API Key` resource.
- `API keys` can have restrictions on which methods can be accessed via an `actions` list; they can also `expiresAt` a specific date time and be restricted to a specific set of `indexes`.
- There is no possibility to regenerate the value of the `key` field for an `API key` in this first iteration.
- New errors are added and the `missing_authorization_header` message is updated.
- The current state of the `API Keys` resource is propagated to snapshots and dumps.

#### 1.5.2 Master Key

The master key exists to secure a MeiliSearch instance. As soon as a master key is set via the  `MEILI_MASTER_KEY` environment variable or the `--master-key` CLI option , the endpoint `/keys` is accessible only for the master key holder. It can be seen as a super admin key; It must be shared only with people who have to manage the security of a MeiliSearch instance.

> This master key is not an API Key, thus is not stored and fetchable from the `/keys` API endpoint. It must be seen as a runtime lock that activates the security of MeiliSearch as soon as an instance is launched with it.

Author: I should precise "API Key resource". It is not an API key in the sense that it is not to be shared, is not stored, and is not displayed as a resource in the list of API Keys.

| version | Provides access to `GET` `/version` route.

---

#### **As `Anna 👩`, I want to create an `API key` for `Mark 👨🏻` client-code, so that he can index some documents into MeiliSearch**

##### Request Definition

`POST` - `/keys`

##### Headers

```
"Authorization: Bearer :masterKey"
"Content-Type: application/json"
```

##### Body Payload

```json
{
    "description": "Indexing Products API key",
    "actions": [
        "documents.add"
    ],
    "indexes": ["products"],
    "expiresAt": "2021-11-13T00:00:00Z"
}
```

##### Response

`201 Created`

```json
{
    "description": "Indexing Products API key",
    "key": "d0552b41536279a0ad88bd595327b96f01176a60c2243e906c52ac02375f9bc4",
    "actions": [
        "documents.add"
    ],
    "indexes": ["products"],
    "expiresAt": "2021-11-13T00:00:00Z",
    "createdAt": "2021-11-12T10:00:00Z",
    "updatedAt": "2021-11-12T10:00:00Z"
}
```

##### Requirements

- `actions` is mandatory and should be an array of valid `actions`.
- `indexes` is mandatory and should be an array of string.
- `expiresAt` is mandatory and must be a valid `ISO 8601` datetime in the future or `null`.

> - If set, `description` should be a string or `null`.

Reviewer: Is it possible to have an additional field that contains an unique name for the key? In order to be able to fetch the apiKey without having to watch with human eyes at which index the key is: 

### with name

```js 
const keys = client.getKeys()
const privateKey = keys.find(name => name == "default_private")
```

### Without name

```js
const keys = client.getKeys()
console.log(keys) // look at the description and either count at which index the right key is, or copy paste it from the terminal
```

Author: Yes @bidoubiwa! We could also have a filter system on the indexes and action fields, also a parameter to search in the description field.

This may be in a future iteration.

Reviewer: Thanks :)

- 🔴 Sending a different payload type than the Content-Type header returns a [malformed_payload](0061-error-format-and-definitions.md#malformed_payload) error.
- 🔴 Sending an invalid json format returns a [malformed_payload](0061-error-format-and-definitions.md#malformed_payload) error.
- 🔴 Sending an invalid value for the `actions` field returns an [invalid_api_key_actions](0061-error-format-and-definitions.md#invalid_api_key_actions) error.
- 🔴 Sending an invalid value for the `indexes` field returns an [invalid_api_key_indexes](0061-error-format-and-definitions.md#invalid_api_key_indexes) error.
- 🔴 Sending an invalid value for the `expiresAt` field returns an [invalid_api_key_expires_at](0061-error-format-and-definitions.md#invalid_api_key_expires_at) error.
- 🔴 Sending an invalid value for the `description` field returns an [invalid_api_key_description](0061-error-format-and-definitions.md#invalid_api_key_description) error.

---

#### **As `Anna 👩`, I want to list the API Keys**

##### Request Definition

`GET` - `/keys`

##### Headers

```
"Authorization: Bearer :masterKey"
```

##### Response

`200 Success`

```json
{

>     "results": [

Reviewer: I'm not against the idea at all, just for curiosity: Did you add it in a `results` key in order to be able to add new fields at the root in the future?

Author: This is a convention that we will have from now on when the API lists resources. It actually allows us to add fields in the future quite easily. This is also what we did on the `task` list.

Reviewer: Very good!

| API Key            | API keys are stored and managed from the endpoint `/keys` by the master key holder. These are the keys used by the technical teams to interact with MeiliSearch at the level of the client code. |

### 1.4 Personas

| Persona | Role |
|---------|------|
| Anna    | Anna has an `ssh` access to the MeiliSearch instance and manages it on a daily basis. |
| Mark    | Mark is a developer from the same company as Anna. He will implement the code to communicate with MeiliSearch to solve technical/product needs. |

### 1.5 `API Key` Explanations

#### 1.5.1 Summary Key Points

- `X-MEILI-API-KEY` header is replaced by the `Authorization` header. `API keys` must be specified with the bearer authorization method. See examples.
- `/keys` management is restricted to the master key.
- When a master key is set at MeiliSearch first-launch, we generate two pre-configured default `API Key` resources. A `Default Search API Key` restricted to the search action and a `Default Admin API Key` to handle all operations (except managing `/keys` resource) on MeiliSearch.
- If the master-key changes, all `API Keys` are re-generated.

> - These default API Keys can be modified/deleted with the `/keys` endpoint but are not re-created if MeiliSearch has already generated them at some point.

Reviewer 2: The second sentence is not clear regarding the previous point.
I understand that MeiliSearch will re-generate (so re-create) the key if the master key changes.

Author: Re-creating is adding another 2 new Default API keys to the `/keys` list while re-generating is changing the `key`  field value.

- New endpoints are added to manage the `API Key` resource.
- `API keys` can have restrictions on which methods can be accessed via an `actions` list; they can also `expiresAt` a specific date time and be restricted to a specific set of `indexes`.

> - There is no possibility to regenerate the value of the `key` field for a specific `API key` in this first iteration.

Reviewer 2: Not sure to get what it means. What do you mean by "no possibility to regenerate the value"? You mean you have to create a new key, not to ask literally for a regeneration?

Author: Absolutely @curquiza. This is a future possibility!

| Term               | Definition |
|--------------------|------------|

> | Master Key         | This is the master key that allows you to create other API keys. The master key is defined by the user when launching MeiliSearch, thus give access to the `/keys` API endpoints. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Master Key         | This is the master key that allows you to create other API keys. The master key is defined by the user when launching MeiliSearch. The key gives access to the `/keys` API endpoint. |
```

Or if you prefer to keep your wording: 
```suggestion
| Master Key         | This is the master key that allows you to create other API keys. The master key is defined by the user when launching MeiliSearch, thus give access to the `/keys` API endpoint. |
```
